Title: PDP-11/45: LA30 repair III
Date: 2017-12-2
Tags: Retro-Computing, PDP-11

Digging in on the flip-flops identified as potentially problematic in the previous post, found that E5 had
failed.  Pulled, socketed, and replaced; character generator now correctly clocks all five character columns:

<img style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" src="/images/pdp11/la30-chargen-clock-
trace-fixed.jpg" title="LA30 character generator clocking trace after repair.  Runs correctly to five character columns"/>

After this repair, characters were printing full width, but two problems remained: about half of the
characters printed in response to typing on the keyboard were the wrong character, and the top row was not
printing at all on any character:

<img style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" src="/images/pdp11/la30-second-print.jpg"
title="LA30 second print attempt -- incorrect characters and top row missing"/>

Looking at the incorrect characters problem first, it was clear that bit 4 was not being received by the
character generator correctly.  I was a bit worried that the SMC KR2376-17 scanner/ROM on the keyboard
assembly might be at fault, since Mattis had had some trouble with his.  This is a pretty cool part; a
combined scanner and code translator, with an internal oscillator, rollover logic, debounce delay, and
flexible interfacing:

<img style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" src="/images/pdp11/kr2376-schematic.jpg"
title="KR2376-17 keyboard scanner/encoder internal schematic"/>

...not to mention the very cool vintage ceramic/gold packaging (see below.)  Fortunately, inspection with an
oscilloscope showed that the outputs from the scanner were just fine; chasing downstream, the problem was
found to be just a loose pin (SS) on the keyboard cable Berg connector.  With that sorted, we now have this:

<img style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" src="/images/pdp11/la30-third-print.jpg"
title="LA30 third print attempt -- characters correct, but still missing top row"/>

For the final issue with the top row not printing, verified that the problem followed a particular G380
solenoid driver card when swapping them around, and that with a functional G380 in the appropriate backplane
slot pin 1 fires and prints correctly. Inspection of the problematic G380 revealed a failed power transistor
and blown associated micro-fuse; replacement parts on order.

For the ribbon advance issue, I pulled the ribbon motors and disassembled their top-side reduction gear cases
in order to gain access to the upper rotor bearings.  Cleaning and lubrication of these bearings, plus a few
more taps with a mallet after reassembly, achieved an improved bearing alignment.  With the increased output
torque, the ribbon now advances reliably.

Other minor items: Replacement vibration isolators arrived, and were installed.  Threaded inserts in the
fiberglass top shell that had pulled out were reattached with epoxy.

Have some more travel coming up for work, so may not be able to get back to this for a bit.  Next steps will
be repair of the failed solenoid driver channel, calibrations, then any debug necessary on the M7910 interface
card for the PDP-11.

[pswipe:pdp11,kr2736.jpg,The SMC KR2736-17 keyboard scanner/encoder in the LA30]
[pswipe:pdp11,G380.jpg,G380 solenoid driver card from the LA30, with failed parts pulled]

