Title: PDP-11/45: LA30 repair II
Date: 2017-11-26
Tags: Retro-Computing, PDP-11

Okay, first thing to debug today is the ready light.  This is lit by RDY LITE L, pin A16D2 (lower right of
sheet M7721-0-1 in the LA30 engineering drawings).  Logic probe showed this was correctly asserted low. Pulled
the lamp and checked it with bench supply, and it checked fine.  Verified +10 and ground at the lamp socket as
well, so why isn't it lit?  Turns out it is polarized, and the socket is soldered in backwards (?!). Corrected
the socket, and ready light is working.

Noticed that ribbon is stalling occasionally.  Ribbon tension seems to be overcoming the clutch on the take-up
side.  It seems tensioning drag on the inactive side is too high.  Not sure what to do about this one yet;
there is not much adjustable within the clutches, and the service manual only recommends replacement if they
are out of spec (yeah, good luck finding one!)

Repeated the experiment with loopback jumper (A15R2 to A15C2).  Turns out I had miscounted backplane pins the
first time. With jumper placed correctly, I am now get a printing response to the keyboard.  Not quite right,
but definite progress:

<img style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" src="/images/pdp11/la30-first-print.jpg"
title="LA30 first print attempt"/>

Here I had typed `:;L`, and then some other letters.  You can see evidence of correct pins firing for the
first three characters, though either head movement or pin timing is off.  Letter spacing appears more or less
correct for 80 characters per line.

Okay, hooked up the logic analyzer, and started to take a look at the character generator clocking to see if
all the the columns are being clocked out correctly.  The logic analyzer shows a malfunction consistent with
the print behavior: character column clocking resets after two columns rather than proceeding through all
five:

<img style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" src="/images/pdp11/la30-chargen-clock-
trace.jpg" title="LA30 character generator clocking trace.  Resets incorrectly after only two of five
character columns"/>

This signaling is mediated by a ripple counter on the M7724 character generator card:

<img style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" src="/images/pdp11/la30-chargen-schem.jpg"
title="LA30 character generator clocking partial schematic."/>

So it looks like one or more of these 7474 quad flops has failed.  I note on my chargen board that these are
early 70's Nat Semi parts; Mattis had a very similar issue (search "7474" on [this
page](http://www.datormuseum.se/computers/digital-equipment-corporation/pdp-11-04)) on his LA30 chargen with
the same parts.

All I have time for this weekend; next time I'll get the chip clip on these for a closer look, then pull and
replace the baddies.
